README.md, before:

# spiffe-helper-rust

A Rust implementation of spiffe-helper.

spiffe-helper fetches SPIFFE X.509 certificates and JWT tokens from the SPIRE agent. It acts as a bridge to integrate other programs with SPIRE.

## Tooling

This repository depends on several CLI tools (`kind`, `kubectl`, `helm`, `jq`, and `openssl`). We do **not** download or pin binary releases for you; instead, we provide a quick verification script so you can continue using whatever versions your package manager supplies.

### Verify prerequisites (`make tools`)

Run the following to confirm the required CLIs are present on your `PATH`:

```bash
make tools
```

The `tools` target runs `scripts/install-tools.sh`, which now **only checks** for the tools and prints their versions. If something is missing, the script exits with a failure code and echoes the upstream installation link so you can install/upgrade the tool yourself. Re-run `make tools` after installing to ensure everything is available.

### Installing the tools

Use whichever package manager you prefer. The examples below are common starting points; consult the official docs if you need additional options or platforms.

| Tool    | Homebrew (macOS)                   | Debian/Ubuntu (apt/snap/other)                 | Docs |
| ------- | ---------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- | ---- |
| kind    | `brew install kind`                | `GO111MODULE=on go install sigs.k8s.io/kind@latest` | https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation |
| kubectl | `brew install kubectl`             | `sudo apt-get install -y kubectl`              | https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/ |
| helm    | `brew install helm`                | `curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/helm/helm/main/scripts/get-helm-3 \| bash` | https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/ |
| jq      | `brew install jq`                  | `sudo apt-get install -y jq`                   | https://jqlang.github.io/jq/download/ |
| openssl | `brew install openssl`             | `sudo apt-get install -y openssl`              | https://www.openssl.org/source/ |

Feel free to substitute other installation methods (ASDF, Nix, direct downloads, etc.) as long as the resulting binaries land on your `PATH`. After installation, run `make tools` again to verify the environment.

## Local kind cluster

Use the provided `kind-config.yaml` plus Make targets to spin up a disposable development cluster without touching your global kubeconfig:

1. Create or populate a directory with any certificates you need the cluster to mount (defaults to `./certs`, override with `CERTS_DIR=/absolute/path make cluster-up`).
2. Run `make cluster-up`. The command renders `kind-config.yaml`, creates (or reuses) a kind cluster named `spiffe-helper`, and writes a kubeconfig to `./artifacts/kubeconfig`.
3. Point `kubectl` at the new cluster with `export KUBECONFIG=$(pwd)/artifacts/kubeconfig` and interact as usual.
4. Tear the cluster down with `make cluster-down`. This removes the kind cluster and cleans up the kubeconfig/config rendering under `./artifacts/`.

Both targets are idempotent: re-running `make cluster-up` when the cluster already exists refreshes the kubeconfig; `make cluster-down` is a no-op if the cluster is already gone. The `artifacts/` and `certs/` directories are gitignored so credentials and kubeconfigs remain local-only.

Commit message:

Make certs directory mount optional
Only include the certs mount in kind config if the directory exists and contains files. This avoids creating an empty directory and mounting it unnecessarily.

README.md, after:

# spiffe-helper-rust

A Rust implementation of spiffe-helper.

spiffe-helper fetches SPIFFE X.509 certificates and JWT tokens from the SPIRE agent. It acts as a bridge to integrate other programs with SPIRE.

## Tooling

This repository depends on several CLI tools (`kind`, `kubectl`, `helm`, `jq`, and `openssl`). We do **not** download or pin binary releases for you; instead, we provide a quick verification script so you can continue using whatever versions your package manager supplies.

### Verify prerequisites (`make tools`)

Run the following to confirm the required CLIs are present on your `PATH`:

```bash
make tools
```

The `tools` target runs `scripts/install-tools.sh`, which now **only checks** for the tools and prints their versions. If something is missing, the script exits with a failure code and echoes the upstream installation link so you can install/upgrade the tool yourself. Re-run `make tools` after installing to ensure everything is available.

### Installing the tools

Use whichever package manager you prefer. The examples below are common starting points; consult the official docs if you need additional options or platforms.

| Tool    | Homebrew (macOS)                   | Debian/Ubuntu (apt/snap/other)                 | Docs |
| ------- | ---------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- | ---- |
| kind    | `brew install kind`                | `GO111MODULE=on go install sigs.k8s.io/kind@latest` | https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation |
| kubectl | `brew install kubectl`             | `sudo apt-get install -y kubectl`              | https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/ |
| helm    | `brew install helm`                | `curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/helm/helm/main/scripts/get-helm-3 \| bash` | https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/ |
| jq      | `brew install jq`                  | `sudo apt-get install -y jq`                   | https://jqlang.github.io/jq/download/ |
| openssl | `brew install openssl`             | `sudo apt-get install -y openssl`              | https://www.openssl.org/source/ |

Feel free to substitute other installation methods (ASDF, Nix, direct downloads, etc.) as long as the resulting binaries land on your `PATH`. After installation, run `make tools` again to verify the environment.

## Local kind cluster

Use the provided `kind-config.yaml` plus Make targets to spin up a disposable development cluster without touching your global kubeconfig:

1. (Optional) If you need to mount certificates into the cluster, create and populate a directory with your certificates (defaults to `./certs`, override with `CERTS_DIR=/absolute/path make cluster-up`). The certs mount is only included if the directory exists and contains files.
2. Run `make cluster-up`. The command renders `kind-config.yaml`, creates (or reuses) a kind cluster named `spiffe-helper`, and writes a kubeconfig to `./artifacts/kubeconfig`.
3. Point `kubectl` at the new cluster with `export KUBECONFIG=$(pwd)/artifacts/kubeconfig` and interact as usual.
4. Tear the cluster down with `make cluster-down`. This removes the kind cluster and cleans up the kubeconfig/config rendering under `./artifacts/`.

Both targets are idempotent: re-running `make cluster-up` when the cluster already exists refreshes the kubeconfig; `make cluster-down` is a no-op if the cluster is already gone. The `artifacts/` and `certs/` directories are gitignored so credentials and kubeconfigs remain local-only.
